one of the things that was physicists
find ourselves saying all the time is
Einstein was right his theory of general
relativity is the best description we
have for how gravity works everything
from launching satellites into space to
how planets orbit around the Sun and how
the Sun orbits on the Milky Way and also
how stuff moves around black holes every
test we've put it through it's passed
with flying colors so does that mean
that we can all just sort of pat
ourselves on the back and brush our
hands of it and all go home because jobs
done no we are still testing gravity and
crucially we're coming up with different
theories of gravity which we could also
test our understanding of in the hope of
better understanding how our universe
works so let's kick things off with a
little bit of a reminder of some science
history Isaac Newton is credited with
the first explanation of what gravity is
that every single particle is attracted
to every other particle in the universe
by a force and that force depends on how
massive those particles are and how far
apart they are Newton wrote that down as
a few equations and those equations
allowed us to predict where cannonballs
would land and how high we could throw a
ball and even the orbits of the planets
now when those predictions were accurate
it became clear that this was the way
that gravity was working at least in our
local backyard of the universe and in
the physics labs on earth ie the places
that we were able to test it in at the
time however the planet Mercury through
a bit of a spanner in the works Newton's
equations didn't give accurate
predictions for Mercury's orbit so that
suggested that his theory and his
equations were flawed somehow so a long
came in Stein in 1915 with his theory of
general relativity and I've taught
before on this channel about how
Mercury's orbit was actually one of the
very first tests of general activity
linked the video up here so you can go
check out if you want now the way that
Einstein's thought about gravity was
very different to how Newton thought
about it instead of just sort of this
force acting at a distance he thought of
gravity as mass curving space-time and
here it's sort of representative in 2d
but really you have to try and picture
it in 3d that's just incredibly
incredibly difficult to do now
Einstein's equations that describe how
gravity works look very different to
Newton's and that's because Einstein
worked with something called tensors
that actually appreciate the full four
dimensions of space-time so the three
dimensions of space so forward back left
right up down and then also time what
the tensors do is mathematically
describe how space is curved by an
object with mass you can take Einstein's
equation and the full tensor form that
it starts in work it all the way through
for Mercury's orbit for example and
you'll get out something that actually
looks very similar to Newton's equations
it just has this extra term and that
extra term is divided by C squared the
speed of light squared and the speed of
light is a huge number and if you take a
huge number and times it by a huge
number you can again a bigger number and
so if you divide a term by such a big
number you essentially get incredibly
close to zero so in most cases that term
is just not going to matter at all for
example here on earth throwing a ball up
into the air that term vanishes to zero
and except when either the mass is very
large or the radius is small so for
example in Mercury's case mercury is
very close to the Sun which is very
massive so it makes a difference it also
makes a difference around massive
objects like black holes and we were
able to test that properly for the first
time when we had that first ever image
of a black hole back in 2019 thanks to
the event horizon telescope everywhere
and every way we've been able to test
general relativity its predictions
Ben right so everything from planet
orbits to pulsars to black holes to
gravitational waves it's all evidence in
favor of Einstein's theory of general
relativity those equations that he came
up with a thought to govern everything
from the expansion of the universe to
the behavior of black holes to how
gravitational waves move through space
to the formation of every single
structure in the universe from the
smallest planet to the biggest galaxy to
the biggest clusters of galaxies but
what about the areas that we've not been
able to test general relativity for
example around bigger and more energetic
objects the entire universe perhaps or
on the opposite scale the tiniest
objects in the universe such as
particles the quantum level do you guys
just put the word quantum in front of
everything just general relativity hold
there well we assume it does at the
minute because of all the scales we've
been able to test it has held but what
we're doing is extrapolating there we're
saying because it works on the smaller
scales that we've been able to test it
must work on even smaller and because it
works on the biggest and the most
energetic scales we've been able to test
it must work on even bigger ones than
those but just like how Newton's
equations work perfectly on everyday
scales here on earth but then don't four
other scales such as large masses and
small radii then you might also start to
think well what if that's also
applicable for general relativity what
if there's also some scales where you
need that extra term maybe and you need
to also general relativity in some way
in order to make accurate predictions
now you might be thinking this is very
interesting at all Becky but like this
is just speculation so why should you
care well understanding gravity has huge
implications for how we understand how
the universe was formed how it's
evolving and what it's made of as well
it's a branch of astrophysics that we
call cosmology with general relativity
proven on all the scales that we can
test it on it's actually the problems in
cosmology that I've talked about before
on this channel about the current crisis
in cosmology that's going on
that is actually driving forward the
need for a slightly altered theory of
gravity if general relativity is correct
then it predicts that 96% of the
universe is dark and doesn't interact
with light it predicts that dark energy
makes up 70% of the universe and we
don't know what that is it's this
mysterious force or energy that's acting
against gravity to cause the expansion
of the universe
to speed up then the other chunk of the
dark universe is dark matter there's so
much evidence for dark matter it's just
all gravitational in nature ie we don't
see it with our eyes necessarily but we
see its influence due to gravity so all
of those things dark energy dark matter
really do raise the question of whether
general activity that has served us so
well so far and all the scales that
we've been able to test it on is maybe
not the full picture it's not the
Einstein was wrong just like Newton
wasn't wrong it's just that in the
scales that we're looking at it just
maybe needs modifying slightly so there
are currently astrophysicists in
institutions across the world that are
trying to come up with new theories of
gravity and crucially test whether they
are right another thing like this is a
new thing either like physicists have
been trying to you know make general
activity better with some edits you know
ever since Einstein first proposed it in
1915 you know everyone from Eddington to
Dirac to Sakharov so like I said the
majority of these new theories are
modifications or extensions to
Einstein's theory of general relativity
because 80
new theory of gravity you come up with
still has to work as well as general
activity has on all the scales that
we've tested it on but sometimes people
have been known to basically just
crumple up everything we've currently
gotten through out the window and start
from scratch which I'm sure that sounds
overwhelming as does trying to adapt
general activity as well so how do
people actually go about doing this
well here's three different ways number
one is starting from an observation and
working backwards from there so for
example theories like munde modified
Newtonian dynamics have started with
this idea that Dark Matter might not
necessarily need to exist to explain
something that we've observed so one of
the strongest pieces of evidence for
dark matter is the idea of galaxy
rotation curves so the speed that stars
are moving around the center of a galaxy
when we look at a galaxy all the light
is concentrated in the center pretty
much that's where the brightest spot is
that's the same as what we see in the
solar system right 99% of all the stuff
in the solar system is basically the
sun's mass so we look at what speed the
planets are going around the Sun we see
that speed drop-off as we get further
out so we'd expect to see the same thing
in galaxies but we don't speed actually
increases as you go out to the outskirts
and that suggests that actually instead
of the mass being concentrated in the
center there's actually a load of mass
on the outskirts but that's not where we
see stars so it's assumed there's lots
of dark matter out on the outskirts of a
galaxy but that's all based on the
assumption that general relativity is
right what if we had a different theory
of gravity would that be able to explain
these galaxies rotation curves so that's
what Mon tries to do actually starts
with Newton's equations not Einsteins
those out einstein's completely and it
actually says well what if we just added
this extra little factor into Newton's
famous equation F equals MA this factor
though only matters for very
Oh acceleration the kind of numbers we
only ever see for stars orbiting around
galaxies then the speed that Monde
predicts that stars should be going
round the center of galaxies is exactly
what we observe but crucially it also
predicts what we observe for planets
going around the Sun as well so it kind
of seems to solve the problem of dark
matter the problem however is that it
doesn't get rid of the need for dark
matter entirely you still need it to
explain the masses that we see in for
example galaxy clusters so it started
out as a theory to explain away dark
matter but it can't get rid of it
entirely it could only sort of reduce
its majority percentage in the universe
but the biggest blow to mond came in
2017 because what modern predicts is
that gravitational waves should travel a
different speed than the speed of light
but in 2017 we detected from the exact
same object at the exact same time a
burst of light and gravitational wave
suggesting that they travel at the same
speed and that was a huge blow for that
theory number two adding an extra field
to general activity I you have a
gravitational field that gives you the
force of gravity but what about if you
had an extra field the coupled to the
gravitational field to give you a fifth
force as people know it because you've
got four fundamental forces in the
universe and this could be one extra one
that we haven't thought of before for
example scalar vector tensor gravity
which ridiculous I'll admit they had an
extra field into general relativity that
at very very small distances produces a
force that acts against gravity it sort
of like a repulsive force to weaken it
but then at very very large distances it
couples to gravity to actually make
gravity stronger so sort of in the
middle in ground from everywhere from
you know the solar system to black holes
to the Milky Way galaxy clusters it
reproduces everything that general
relativity has been able to do but it
can also
explain things on these big cosmological
scales and for example the galaxy
rotation curves without the need for
dark matter but the problem with this
theory is once again with the speed that
it predicts gravitational waves should
travel at if you have this extra field
that's coupled to gravity it will slow
down the speed that gravitational waves
travel at and as I said before in 2017
we found that they traveled at the speed
of light ie the fastest speed that is in
the universe so that result back in 2017
really sent a lot of people that are
working on all these different theories
not just this scalar vector tensor
gravity theory but all the ones that try
and add an extra field to general
relativity back to the physicists
drawing board for blackboard I guess
number three
adding extra dimensions now people might
have come across this idea before in the
context of string theory string theory
was a bit of a buzzword in physics for
the past decade or two it's actually a
particle physics theory one that
attempts to sort of explain everything
by getting rid of the idea that
everything around as matter is made of
particles and saying actually it's made
of one-dimensional vibrating strings
yeah the vibrational properties of the
string ie how the strings vibrate is
supposed to give us this of properties
of particles that were familiar with
like mass and charge but crucially what
string theory also gives you is a theory
of quantum gravity ie how gravity
behaves on the very small scales it says
that gravity is governed by the exchange
of a particle actually a string called
the graviton just like how
electromagnetism is governed by the
exchange of a particle a photon a photon
of light particle of light to work
though string theory needs ten
dimensions not the four of space and
time that we're familiar with now
could indeed be that there are ten
dimensions but on our scales we're just
not able to see them but adding those
extra dimensions has these huge ripple
effects for how gravity behaves on small
and large scales now there are many many
problems with string theory which is why
you don't really hear about it that much
anymore because it's falling out of
favour with the majority of physicists
in the context of this video though
about leading a new theory of gravity
and explaining crisis in cosmology the
issue with string theory is that it
doesn't give you any explanation for
dark energy can't reduce any sort of
repulsive force that could explain the
accelerated expansion of the universe
and okay general relativity doesn't give
you that but generality does a much
better job of explaining everything else
then string theory does so our best
theory for how the universe works is
still one where general activity is the
best description we have of gravity
because it fits our observations the
best the consequence of that is the
prediction of the dark side of the
universe so if you accept Einstein's
theory of general relativity then you
have to accept the dark matter and dark
energy are things but it's by no means
are done in dust in topic like science
never is but that's the beauty of it
that our understanding can change and
evolve over time as new evidence comes
to light and then new scientific
theories that are rooted in that new
evidence and also the mathematical
understanding and then born I for one am
incredibly excited to see where the next
centuries worth of research will take us
first of all thank you so much to you
for watching this video if you liked it
subscribe for more content like this and
also hit that like button so more people
who like watching space videos will see
it second of all a big thank you to my
old office mate dr. Ollie Tattersall who
is an expert in modified gravity
theories and he pointed me in there
right direction to a couple of really
good review papers on this topic which I
have linked in the description below if
you want to do like a really big deep
dive into this and then last but not
least a huge thank you to this week's
sponsor which is brilliant brilliant is
a problem-solving website that gets you
to learn by doing now those of you who
have been following this channel for a
while will know that if people ask me
you know I want to be an astrophysicist
when I get older what's the best thing
that I can do to prepare for that I
won't tell them it's to learn to code my
language of choice is Python and you can
find courses on Python on brilliant as
well as on sort of the fundamentals of
computer science and algorithms as well
brilliant teaches you to think like a
scientist breaking down problems into
easy-to-understand chunks but crucially
having interactive sessions that give
them like a fun application so you know
how to apply the knowledge that you're
learning if you like the sound of that
then go to brilliant org forward slash
dr. Becky that's the rpe CK why and sign
up for free also just for you luck the
first 200 people that go to that link
will get 20% off an annual premium
subscription sponsorships like this from
brilliant allow me to keep tracking
science with you guys and for you guys
to afford any skills you need so head
over that you're brilliant and say
thanks for me made of it's a branch of
astrophysics that we call cosmology
cosmology I feel like it did cosmology
didn't change generality but see ever
since Einstein first proposed it in 1915
including people like edited and edited
editor editing Becky yeah famous
physicist Arthur editing it's by no
means a done and often dusted are done
and dusted topic though science never is
and that's the beauty of of the villa